>> Ifill: WE'LL DEVOTE THE BULK
OF THE PROGRAM TONIGHT TO THE
UNFOLDING STORY IN FERGUSON,
MISSOURI.
AS CONFRONTATIONS BETWEEN
PROTESTERS AND POLICE ESCALATE,
WE LOOK AT WHAT'S HAPPENING
THERE AND THE CONVERSATIONS
SPARKED AROUND THE NATION.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY, IRAQ'S
EMBATTLED PRIME MINISTER, NURI
AL-MALIKI GIVES UP HIS POST.ND D
KURDISH FORCES BEAT BACK A SEIGE
BY ISLAMIC MILITANTS IN THE
NORTH.
ALLOWING THOUSANDS OF REFUGEES
TRAPPED ON A MOUNTAIN TO ESCAPE.
>> Ifill: ALL THAT AND MORE ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE GOVERNOR OF
MISSOURI TODAY ORDERED THE STATE
HIGHWAY PATROL TO TAKE OVER
SECURITY IN THE ST. LOUIS SUBURB
OF FERGUSON.CAL POLICE HAVE DRAY
CRITICISM FOR THEIR USE OF FORCE
AGAINST PROTESTERS LAST NIGHT.
THE CROWD WAS DEMONSTRATING
AGAINST THE FATAL SHOOTING OF
MICHAEL BROWN, AN UNARMED BLACK
TEENAGER.
HIGHWAY PATROL CAPTAIN RON
JOHNSON GREW UP IN FERGUSON, AND
HE'LL BE IN CHARGE.
HE SAID IT'S VITAL TO BREAK THE
CYCLE OF VIOLENCE.
>> I PLAN MYSELF ON WALKING TO
THE QUICK TRIP THAT HAS BEEN
CALLED GROUND ZERO AND MEETING
WITH THE FOLKS THERE MYSELF
TONIGHT.
AND SO WE ARE GOING TO HAVE A
DIFFERENT APPROACH.
THAT WE ARE IN THIS TOGETHER.
THAT'S THE APPROACH WE ARE GOING
TO HAVE TONIGHT.
AND LOOK AT OUR RESOURCES TO
MAKE SURE WE'RE NOT TAKING
RESOURCES OUT THERE THAT WE
DON'T NEED.
BUT WHEN WE DO NEED THOSE
RESOURCES THEY WILL STILL BE
HERE.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL HAVE THE FULL
STORY OF THE VIOLENCE THAT
ERUPTED IN FERGUSON LAST NIGHT
AND REACTION FROM THE WHITE
HOUSE ON DOWN AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
>> Ifill: IRAQI PRIME MINISTER
NOURI AL-MALIKI FINALLY STEPPED
DOWN THIS EVENING, AS HIS
SUPPORT CRUMBLED ON ALL SIDES.
HE WILL NOW SUPPORT HAIDER AL-
ABADI'S NOMINATION TO BE THE NEW
PRIME MINISTER.
THERE WAS ALSO WORD THAT THE
U.S. HAS NOW DECIDED NOT TO
EXPAND A HUMANITARIAN RESCUE
MISSION THAT MIGHT HAVE PUT U.S.
COMBAT TROOPS BACK ON THE
GROUND.
>> WE DO NOT EXPECT THERE TO BE
AN ADDITIONAL OPERATION TO
EVACUATE PEOPLE OFF THE
MOUNTAIN.
AND IT'S UNLIKELY THAT WE'RE
GONNA NEED TO CONTINUE
HUMANITARIAN AIRDOPS ON THE
MOUNTAIN.
>> Ifill: FROM PRESIDENT OBAMA
TODAY, CONFIRMATION THAT THE
CRISIS FACING YAZIDI REFUGEES IN
NORTHERN IRAQ HAS GREATLY EASED.
FIGHTERS FROM THE "ISLAMIC
STATE" GROUP HAD SURROUNDED
THOUSANDS OF YAZIDIS ON MOUNT
SINJAR.BUT MILITARY AND CIVILIAN
ADVISERS SENT IN THIS WEEK
REPORTED U.S. AIR STRIKES BROKE
THE SIEGE.
AT THE PENTAGON TODAY, REAR
ADMIRAL JOHN KIRBY SAID THE AIR
CAMPAIGN AND KURDISH GROUND
FORCES HELPED THE YAZIDIS
ESCAPE.
>> WE BELIEVE THAT THOUSANDS OF
THEM WERE LEAVING EVERY NIGHT.
NOW, I CAN'T GIVE YOU AN EXACT
FIGURE OF HOW MANY EVERY NIGHT.
BUT CERTAINLY MORE THAN A
THOUSAND OR SO EVERY NIGHT WERE
LEAVING THE MOUNTAIN WITH
PESHMERGA HELP.
>> Woodruff: KIRBY ESTIMATED
ABOUT 4,000 PEOPLE REMAIN ON THE
MOUNTAIN, BUT NEARLY HALF ARE
SAID TO BE HERDERS WHO LIVE
THERE AND HAVE NO INTEREST IN
LEAVING.
>> Reporter: THOSE WHO DID LEAVE
CONTINUE TO ARRIVE IN REFUGEE
CAMPS AND MANY SAY THEY WILL
NEVER RETURN
>> ( translated ): MY FEELING
TOWARDS SINJAR?
NO WAY, NO WAY CAN I GO BACK.
HOW CAN MY EYES SEE SINJAR AGAIN
WHEN I WITNESSED HUNDREDS OF
PEOPLE DIE THERE?
>> Ifill: MEANWHILE, THERE WERE
NEW CLASHES IN WESTERN IRAQ
TODAY BETWEEN ISLAMIC STATE"
FIGHTERS AND GOVERNMENT FORCES
AROUND FALLUJAH, IN ANBAR
PROVINCE.
THE GOVERNOR OF THE PROVINCE
APPEALED FOR U.S. AIR STRIKES
THERE TOO, BUT AMERICAN
OFFICIALS HAD NO IMMEDIATE
RESPONSE.
IN ANOTHER DEVELOPMENT, FRANCE
ANNOUNCED THE IMMINENT DELIVERY
OF MILITARY AID TO KURDISH
FORCES BATTLING THE MILITANTS.
>> Woodruff: IN PAKISTAN,
THOUSANDS OF ANTI-GOVERNMENT
DEMONSTRATORS HEADED TOWARD
ISLAMABAD, THE CAPITAL, WHERE
POLICE HAVE BARRICADED ENTRY
POINTS.
THE PROTESTERS ARE DEMANDING
THAT PRIME MINISTER NAWAZ SHARIF
RESIGN OVER CLAIMS HE CAME TO
POWER A YEAR AGO THROUGH VOTE
RIGGING.
ONE PROTEST CONVOY WAS LED BY
IMRAN KHAN, AN OPPOSITION PARTY
LEADER.
CARS, TRUCKS AND BUSES LEFT FROM
LAHORE THIS MORNING, WITH MORE
THAN 5,000 PROTESTERS.
OTHERS JOINED ALONG THE WAY.
>> Ifill: THREE PEOPLE WERE
KILLED IN EGYPT TODAY AS
SECURITY FORCES CRUSHED SMALL
PROTESTS BY ISLAMISTS.
THEY WERE TRYING TO MARK THE
ANNIVERSARY OF THE KILLING OF
MORE THAN A THOUSAND
DEMONSTRATORS ONE YEAR AGO.
THOSE DEMONSTRATIONS FOLLOWED
THE MILITARY OUSTER OF ISLAMIST
PRESIDENT MOHAMMED MORSI.
>> Woodruff: A RUSSIAN AID
CONVOY EDGED CLOSER TO THE
UKRAINIAN BORDER TODAY.
MORE THAN 200 VEHICLES HEADED
TOWARD A CROSSING CONTROLLED BY
PRO-RUSSIAN REBELS.
UKRAINIAN OFFICIALS HAD DEMANDED
THE CONVOY PASS THROUGH A
GOVERNMENT BORDER POST SO ITS
CARGO CAN BE INSPECTED.
MEANWHILE, THE UKRAINIAN
GOVERNMENT DISPATCHED ITS OWN
SHIPMENT OF RELIEF SUPPLIES TO
THE WAR TORN REGION.
IT IS SENDING 75 TRUCKS LOADED
WITH 800 TONS OF AID.
>> Ifill: DOSES OF A POTENTIALLY
LIFE-SAVING DRUG HAVE ARRIVED IN
LIBERIA TO TREAT EBOLA PATIENTS.
Z-MAPP IS STILL UNTESTED, AND
THESE ARE THE LAST KNOWN DOSES.
THE COMPANY THAT DEVELOPED IT
SAYS PRODUCING MORE  WILL TAKE
MONTHS.
ALSO TODAY, THE U.S. ORDERED
FAMILY MEMBERS OF EMBASSY
EMPLOYEES IN SIERRA LEONE TO
LEAVE IMMEDIATELY DUE TO THE
EBOLA OUTBREAK.
>> Woodruff: THERE'S WORD THAT
ACTOR AND COMEDIAN ROBIN
WILLIAMS WAS IN THE EARLY STAGES
OF PARKINSON'S DISEASE WHEN HE
COMMITTED SUICIDE.
HIS WIFE, SUSAN SCHNEIDER,
ANNOUNCED IT TODAY IN A
STATEMENT.
WILLIAMS HAD A LONG HISTORY OF
SUBSTANCE ABUSE, BUT THE
STATEMENT SAID HE HAD RETURNED
TO SOBRIETY.
PARKINSON'S DISEASE ATTACKS THE
NERVOUS SYSTEM, AND DESTROYS THE
ABILITY TO CONTROL MOVEMENT.
IT IS INCURABLE.
>> Ifill: ON WALL STREET TODAY,
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED MORE THAN 61 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 16,713; THE NASDAQ ROSE
NEARLY 19 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
4,453; AND THE S&P 500 WAS UP
EIGHT POINTS TO FINISH AT 1,
>> Woodruff: WE RETURN NOW TO
THE DRAMA THAT UNFOLDED IN THE
ST. LOUIS SUBURB OF FERGUSON,
MISSOURI, LAST NIGHT AND
DOMINATED CONVERSATION ACROSS
THE COUNTRY TODAY.
IT WAS A SCENE OF UTTER CHAOS
THAT RIVETED THE NATION'S
ATTENTION.
STUN GRENADES AND TEAR GAS
EXPLODED IN THE STREETS OF
FERGUSON.
AS HEAVILY ARMED POLICE AIMED
WEAPONS FROM ARMORED TRUCKS.
POLICE SAID THEY USED FORCE WHEN
A PROTEST THAT BEGAN PEACEFULLY,
TURNED VIOLENT, WITH PEOPLE
THROWING ROCKS AND FIREBOMBS.
>> YOU MUST DISPERSE
IMMEDIATELY.
THIS IS NO LONGER A PEACEFUL
PROTEST WHEN YOU TRY TO INJURE
PEOPLE.
YOU MUST DISPERSE NOW.
>> Woodruff: WITH THAT, OFFICERS
LOOSED THE BARRAGE OF GRENADES
AND GAS, SENDING THE CROWD
FLEEING.
>> WE JUST SAID, "HANDS UP,
DON'T SHOOT!"
>> Reporter: IS THAT ALL YOU
WERE SAYING?
>> THAT'S ALL WE WERE SAYING,
"HANDS UP, DON'T SHOOT!"
>> Reporter: WERE YOU IN THE
FRONT LINE UP THERE?
>> IN THE FRONT LINE!
YES!
AND THEY JUST START SHOOTING!
>> Woodruff: BOTH CITY AND
COUNTY OFFICERS WERE INVOLVED,
AND TODAY THEY DEFENDED THEIR
ACTIONS.
THOMAS JACKSON IS CHIEF OF THE
FERGUSON POLICE.
>> THERE IS GUNFIRE, THERE ARE
FIREBOMBS BEING THROWN AT THE
POLICE.
I UNDERSTAND THAT WHAT IT LOOKS
LIKE IS NOT GOOD.
THE WHOLE SITUATION IS NOT GOOD.
WE WOULD LIKE THE PROTESTERS TO
STOP THE VIOLENCE, WE CERTAINLY
DON'T WANT TO HAVE ANY VIOLENCE
ON OUR PART.
WE WANT THIS TO BE PEACEFUL.
IF INDIVIDUALS ARE IN A CROWD
THAT'S ATTACKING POLICE, THEY
NEED TO GET OUT OF THAT CROWD.
WE CAN'T INDIVIDUALLY GO IN AND
SAY, "EXCUSE ME, SIR, ARE YOU
PEACEFULLY PROTESTING, ARE YOU
THROWING ROCKS?
ARE YOU THROWING A MOLOTOV
COCKTAIL?"
IT'S A CROWD.
>> Woodruff: THE "ST. LOUIS POST
DISPATCH" REPORTED TEN PEOPLE
WERE ARRESTED.
AMONG THEM, ST. LOUIS CITY
ALDERMAN ANTONIO FRENCH, WHO'D
BEEN CHRONICLING EVENTS ON
SOCIAL MEDIA.
INCLUDING SEVERAL VINE VIDEO
POSTS.
>> WHAT DO WE WANT?
JUSTICE!
>> Woodruff: FRENCH WAS RELEASED
THIS MORNING.
>> STOP VIDEOTAPING!
LET'S GRAB OUR STUFF AND GO.
>> Woodruff: "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTER WESLEY LOWERY RECORDED
THIS EXCHANGE WITH POLICE AS HE
AND A "HUFFINGTON POST" REPORTER
WERE ORDERED TO CLEAR OUT OF A
NEARBY MCDONALD'S.
THE REPORTERS WERE DETAINED AND
LATER RELEASED WITHOUT ANY
CHARGES.
SEPARATELY, MEMBERS OF AN "AL
JAZEERA AMERICA" TV CREW HAD TO
RUN FOR IT AFTER POLICE FIRED
TEAR GAS AS THEY PREPARED FOR A
LIVE REPORT.
TODAY, THE POLICE CHIEF DENIED
THE MEDIA HAD BEEN DELIBERATELY
TARGETED.
BUT THE STARK IMAGES FROM LAST
NIGHT REVERBATED FAR BEYOND
FERGUSON.
PRESIDENT OBAMA INTERRUPTED HIS
VACATION ON MARTHA'S VINEYARD.
>> THERE IS NEVER AN EXCUSE FOR
VIOLENCE AGAINST POLICE OR FOR
THOSE WHO WOULD USE THIS TRAGEDY
AS A COVER FOR VANDALISM OR
LOOTING.
THERE'S ALSO NO EXCUSE FOR
POLICE TO USE EXCESSIVE FORCE
AGAINST PEACEFUL PROTESTS OR TO
THROW PROTESTERS IN JAIL FOR
LAWFULLY EXERCISING THEIR FIRST
AMENDMENT RIGHTS.
AND HERE IN THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, POLICE SHOULD NOT BE
BULLYING OR ARRESTING
JOURNALISTS WHO ARE JUST TRYING
TO DO THEIR JOBS AND REPORT TO
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ON WHAT THEY
SEE ON THE GROUND.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE, MISSOURI
POLITICAL LEADERS SPENT THE DAY
IN FERGUSON.
U.S. SENATOR CLAIRE McCASKILL,
KING AFTER A COMMUNITY
GATHERING, SHARPLY CRITICIZED
POLICE TACTICS.
>> I THINK THAT THE POLICE
RESPONSE NEEDS TO BE
DEMILITARIZED.
I THINK THAT THE POLICE RESPONSE
HAS BECOME PART OF THE PROBLEM
AS OPPOSED TO BEING PART OF THE
SOLUTION.
>> Woodruff: POLICE CHIEF
JACKSON REJECTED THE CRITICISM.
>> THE WHOLE PICTURE IS BEING
PAINTED A LITTLE BIT SIDEWAYS
FROM WHAT'S REALLY HAPPENING.
AND IT'S NOT MILITARY, IT'S
TACTICAL OPERATIONS, IT'S SWAT
TEAMS.
THAT'S WHO'S OUT THERE.
POLICE.
WE'RE DOING THIS IN BLUE.
IN A STATEMENT, U.S. ATTORNEY
GENERAL ERIC HOLDER ALSO VOICED
CONCERNS ABOUT POLICE ACTIONS,
AND SAID THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
HAS OFFERED TO PROVIDE TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE WITH CROWD CONTROL.TN
HAVE SWEPT ACROSS THE WORLD WIDE
WEB, IN A TORRENT OF VIDEOS,
TWEETS AND RE-TWEETS.
THE CHANT OF "HANDS UP, DON'T
SHOOT" HAD ALREADY MORPHED INTO
A RALLYING CRY ON SOCIAL MEDIA.
THIS MORNING, HOWARD UNIVERSITY,
IN WASHINGTON D.C., POSTED A
PHOTO ON ITS FACEBOOK PAGE
SHOWING SCORES OF STUDENTS WITH
HANDS RAISED AND THE HASHTAG
"HANDS UP, DON'T SHOOT."
SIMILAR PHOTOS FROM ACROSS THE
COUNTRY ALSO CIRCULATED ONLINE.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE
INVESTIGATION CONTINUED INTO THE
INCIDENT THAT STARTED ALL THIS,
SATURDAY'S SHOOTING OF 18-YEAR-
OLD MICHAEL BROWN.
THE IDENTITY OF THE OFFICER WHO
FIRED THE FATAL SHOT REMAINED A
POINT OF CONTENTION.
AUTHORITIES AGAIN SAID THEY'RE
NOT READY TO RELEASE THE NAME,
DUE, PARTLY, TO DEATH THREATS.
AT ONE POINT, A TWITTER ACCOUNT
ASSOCIATED WITH THE ACTIVIST
GROUP ANONYMOUS DID PUBLISH A
NAME THAT IT SAID WAS THE
OFFICER IN QUESTION.
THAT WAS FLATLY DENIED BY
POLICE, AND TWITTER LATER
SUSPENDED THE ACCOUNT.
>> Woodruff: FOR A LOOK AT
WHAT'S HAPPENING ON THE GROUND
IN FERGUSON, WE TURN TO "USA
TODAY" REPORTER YAMICHE
ALCINDOR, WHO WAS THERE LAST
NIGHT.
SHE REGULARLY COVERS SOCIAL
ISSUES RELATING TO CRIMINAL
JUSTICE.
I SPOKE TO HER A SHORT TIME AGO.
YAMICHE ALCINDOR, WE THANK YOU
FOR TALKING WITH US.
FIRST OF ALL, REACTION TO THE
GOVERNOR'S ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE
MISSOURI HIGHWAY PATROL IS GOING
TO BE TAKING OVER LAW
ENFORCEMENT THERE.
>> RESIDENTS HERE FOR THE LAST
TWO DAYS THAT I HAVE BEEN HERE
HAVE REALLY BEEN COMPLAINING
ABOUT WHAT THEY CONSIDER
MILITARY-TILE POLICING.
PEOPLE ARE WELCOMING THIS
ANNOUNCEMENT.
A WOMAN I TALKED TO SAID SHE WAS
SCARED TO HAVE HER CHILD IN THE
STREET AND SHE'S GOING IN EXTRA
EARLY.
I THINK PEOPLE ARE RIELLE
HUNTERLY EXCITED ABOUT.
THIS EVEN THOUGH THEY DON'T KNOW
EXACTLY WHAT'S COMING AND
THEY'RE STILL WORRIED ABOUT WHAT
THE HIGHWAY PATROL WILL DO,
PEOPLE THINK IF IT WON'T BE
TANKS OR TEAR GAS THAT IT MAY BE
BETTER.
>> Woodruff: YOU WERE VERY
MUCH THERE LAST NIGHT, REPORTING
ON IT, TWEETING ABOUT IT.
WHAT DID YOU SEE?
OFFICIALS ARE SAYING PEOPLE IN
THE CROWD WERE THROWING ROCKS,
THROWING FIRE BOMBS.
>> I DID NOT SEE PEOPLE THROWING
ROCKS AND FIRE BOMBS BUT I KNOW
THERE ARE SOME IMAGES OF PEOPLE
DOING THAT, SO I THINK THAT THAT
MIGHT HAVE ACTUALLY HAPPENED.
WHAT I SAW MOSTLY WAS PEOPLE
CROWDING IN DIFFERENT AREAS,
PICKING UP THEIR ARMS, SAYING,
DON'T SHOOT, HANDS UP.
PEOPLE WERE IN SOME WAYS
AGGRESSIVELY WALKING UP TO
POLICE AND KIND OF TAUNTING
THEM.
AT ABOUT 2:00 IN THE MORNING, I
WAS AT THE FERGUSON POLICE
STATION AND A GROUP OF SIX OR
SEVEN PEOPLE WALKED ON TO THE
FERGUSON POLICE PROPERTY AND
TAUNTING THE POLICE THERE.
SOON AFTER THE ST. LOUIS COUNTY
POLICE SHOWED UP WITH ABOUT FOUR
TRUCKS AND 60 OFFICERS IN RIOT
GEAR.
SO I SAW THAT.
I ALSO SAW OFFICERS WITH RIFLES
DRAWN, KIND OF POINTED AT PEOPLE
THEY THOUGHT WERE TAUNTING THEM
OR THEY THOUGHT MIGHT BE
SHOOTING AT THEM.
>> Woodruff: AND YAMICHE
ALCINDOR, WHAT ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED BETWEEN THE POLICE AND
NEWS MEDIA, REPORTERS?
I SAW YOU TWEETED ABOUT POLICE
YELLING AT YOU AT ONE POINT.
>> POLICE YELLED AT ME, BUT THEY
ALSO YELLED AT PEOPLE THAT WERE
IN THE STREET.
THEY WERE REALLY TRYING TO GET
PEOPLE OUT AND DISPERSED AND I
WAS TAKING ABOUT THREE TO FIVE
PEOPLE BEING ARRESTED AT 2:30 IN
THE MORNING AND THE POLICE DID
NOT TAKE KINDLY TO THAT.
I WAS ALSO TOLD TO LEAVE WITH
THE PROTESTERS, THEY MADE AN
ANNOUNCEMENT SAYING LEAVE THE
AREA.
BUT THEY WERE VERY AGGRESSIVE
WITH PEOPLE AT THE END SAYING
YOU NEED TO LEAVE OR YOU WILL GO
TO JAIL.
I SAW THE PEOPLE BEING ARRESTED
AND I TOOK A PICTURE AND THE
POLICE WERE NOT HAPPY.
I CAN UNDERSTAND THEY WERE
TRYING TO GET PEOPLE DISPERSED
AND THE PEOPLE WERE BEING
ARRESTED AND THAT'S MY
EXPERIENCE WITH THE POLICE HERE.
FOR THE MOST PART, POLICE HAVE
BEEN RESPECTFUL OF ME AS A
JOURNALIST FOR THE MAJORITY OF
THE TIME HERE.
>> Woodruff: HAVE TEMPERATURES
COOLED DOWN AT ALL?
WHAT'S GOING ON WHERE YOU ARE?
I SEE PEOPLE ARE BIND YOU.
>> PEOPLE ARE BEHIND ME.
THEY'RE PROTESTING.
PEOPLE ARE REALLY NOT DYING
DOWN.
I THOUGHT THE FIRST COUPLE OF
DAYS HERE, OKAY, THINGS WILL GET
QUIET, PEOPLE WILL GO HOME AND
NOT THINK ABOUT THIS ANYMORE,
BUT I TALKED TO MEN WHO LIVES
FEET AWAY FROM THE SPOT WHERE
MICHAEL BROWN WAS SHOT AND HE
SAID I'M HAPPY WITH WHAT WE'RE
DOING.
THIS IS THE FIRST TIME I'VE SEEN
PEOPLE SO UNITED AND DETERMINED,
AND WE WANT THE OFFICER'S NAME
AND HIM CHARGED WITH MURDER.
PEOPLE ARE REALLY ANGRY.
FOUR TO FIVE DAYS INTO THIS,
PEOPLE ARE REALLY UPSET AND
PEOPLE ARE ORGANIZING AND MAKING
VOICES HEARD THROUGH
DEMONSTRATIONS AND PROTESTS.
>> Woodruff: YAMICHE ALCINDOR,
U.S.A. TODAY, THANK YOU FOR
TALKING WITH US.
TWO REACTIONS TO WHAT'S
HAPPENING, TONY MESSNEGER AND
BRIAN FLETCHER.
WE WELCOME YOU BOTH TO THE
PROGRAM.
BRIAN FLETCHER, HOW DID THE
SITUATION IN FERGUSON
DETERIORATE TO THIS POINT, DO
YOU THINK?
>> I DON'T THINK ANYONE REALLY
KNOWS THE ANSWER TO THAT.3
I BELIEVE IT'S A BUILT-UP
FRUSTRATION OF GENERATIONS OF
DIFFICULTIES WITHIN THE
AFRICAN-AMERICAN COMMUNITY.
UNFORTUNATELY, THIS TRAGIC
ACCIDENT HAPPENED TO OCCUR IN
FERGEN AND COULD HAPPEN IN
ANY LARGE SUBURB IN THE UNITED
STATES.
UNFORTUNATELY, FERGUSON IS
GETTING THE ATTENTION AT THIS
POINT.
>> Woodruff: YOUR NEWSPAPER,
THE EDITORIAL PAGE, TONY
MESSNEGER, HAS BEEN WRITING
ABOUT THIS.
TO MANY, LOOKING IN FROM THE
OUTSIDE, IT'S HARD TO UNDERSTAND
HOW THE POLICE FORCE COULD BE
MAJORITY WHITE AND THE COMMUNITY
MAJORITY AFRICAN-AMERICAN.
HOW CAN THERE BE SUCH A
DISCONNECT OR A DISCREPANCY
BETWEEN THE TWO?
>> I THINK THE IMPORTANT THING
TO UNDERSTAND LOOKING FROM THE
OUTSIDE IS HOW DIVIDED THIS
COMMUNITY IS BY JURISDICTION.
FERGUSON IS A SUBURB OF
ST. LOUIS.
ST. LOUIS THE CITY IS NOT EVEN
IN ST. LOUIS COUNTY.
IT'S ITS OWN CITY.
THE LARGEST POLICE FORCES IN THE
REGION ARE ST. LOUIS COUNTY AND
ST. LOUIS CITY.
WE HAVE 90 MUNICIPALITIES IN
ST. LOUIS COUNTY, FERGUSON ONE
OF THOSE, MANY VERY SMALL, MANY
HAVE POLICE FORCES THAT THEY CAN
BARELY AFFORD, AND SO YOUR BEST
POLICE OFFICERS ARE GOING TO THE
COUNTY OR THE LARGEST
MUNICIPALITY ST. LOUIS CITY, SO
IT'S HARDER FOR THE SMALLER
POLICE FORCES TO ACTUALLY
DEVELOP STRONG FORCES THAT ARE
WORTHY OF THEIR COMMUNITY AND
THAT MATCH THE DEMOGRAPHIC
MAKEUP OF THEIR COMMUNITY, AND
SO THAT'S PART OF WHAT WE HAVE
HERE SOIVMENT YOU'RE SAYING --
>> Woodruff: SO YOU'RE SAYING
IT'S A SALARY ISSUE THAT CAUSES
THE POLICE FORCE NOT TO BE
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE COMMUNITY?
>> I WOULD SAY SALARY IS PART OF
IT.
I WOULD SAY IT'S PRIMARILY AN
ISSUE WHERE YOU HAVE ALL THESE
FF MUNICIPALITIES
FIGHTING FOR SOME OF THE SAME
OFFICERS AS COMPARED TO WHAT
WE'VE ADVOCATED FOR ON THE
EDITORIAL PAGE WHICH IS POR FORE
COMMUNITY TO BECOME ONE LARGER
COMMUNITY WITH ONE LARGE POLICE
FORCE THAT CAN BE REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE COMMUNITY, ONE LARGE FIRE
DEPARTMENT THAT CAN BE
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE COMMUNITY,
INSTEAD OF ALL THESE TINY
DIFFERENT MUNICIPALITIES HAVING
THEIR OWN FORCES.
>> Woodruff: BRIAN FLETCHER,
HOW MUCH OF
REPRESENTATION, YOU THINK,
CONTRIBUTED TO THE TENSIONS
THERE IN FERGUSON?
>> I PERSONALLY DON'T FEEL THAT
CONTRIBUTED AT ALL.
I WILL TELL YOU MY VISION OF WHY
THERE IS A DIFFICULTY OF HAVING
VERY FEW AFRICAN-AMERICANS ON
MOST OF THE ST. LOUIS SUBURBS.
ONE IS THERE'S A LACK OF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN MEN AND WOMEN
GOING THROUGH THE POLICE
ACADEMY.
WE CONSTANTLY TRIED, WHEN I WAS
MAYOR FOR SIX YEARS, TO HIRE
AFRICAN-AMERICANS.
WHEN WE DID SO, THEY WERE
RECRUITED FROM OTHER SURROUNDING
MUNICIPALITIES BECAUSE THEY HAD
THE SAME EXACT ISSUE OF SEEKING
MORE AFRICAN-AMERICAN POLICE
OFFICERS, AND THEY WERE ALLOWED
TO PAY MORE MONEY THAN WE HAVE
BUDGET FOR.
IT'S NOT FOR LACK OF TRYING.
THERE IS NOT ENOUGH CANDIDATES
AVAILABLE WITHIN THE
AFRICAN-AMERICAN COMMUNITY TO
HIRE THEM.
I WOULD LIKE A LIST PROVIDED TO
US IF SOMEONE HAS A LIST AND WE
HAVE BEEN TRYING TO DO THAT.
UNFORTUNATELY, THEY'RE TAKEN
FROM US BY OTHER LARGER
COMMUNITIES.
EVEN THOUGH FERGUSON NOT
SMALL, WE ARE APPROXIMATELY
22,000, AND WE ARE THE FIFTH OR
SIXTH LARGES LARGEST MUNICIPALIF
THOSE THAT TONY MENTIONED.
>> Woodruff: GIVEN THAT, I
CERTAINLY THINK THAT'S PART OF
THE EXPLANATION, BUT TONY
MESSNEGER, ARE THERE OTHER STEPS
THAT COULD HAVE BEEN TAKEN,
SHOULD HAVE BEEN TAKEN, IN YOUR
MIND, TO GET THE COMMUNITY
WORKING CLOSER TOGETHER WITH LAW
ENFORCEMENT?
>> WELL, I THINK PART OF IT IS
JUST TAKING IT SERIOUSLY.
IN THE FIRST EDITORIAL THAT WE
WROTE, FOR INSTANCE, WE TALKED
ABOUT THE ANNUAL RACIAL
PROFILING NUMBERS THAT COME OUT.
IN THE STATE OF MISSOURI, IT'S A
STATE LAW EVERY POLICE FORCE HAS
TO PRODUCE RACIAL PROFILING
NUMBERS EVERY YEAR ON TRAFFIC
STOPS.
FOR ELEVEN OF THE LAST 14 YEARS,
THE STATE HAS GOTTEN WORSE IN
THE RACIAL PROFILING NUMBERS.
MORE BLACKS AS A PERCENTAGE OF
POPULATION ARE PICKED UP IN MANY
MUNICIPALITIES BASED ON THOSE
NUMBERS AND EVERY YEAR THE
NUMBERS COME OUT AND EVERY YEAR
PEOPLE DON'T PAY THAT MUCH
ATTENTION TO IT.
I DON'T BELIEVE THAT WE HAVE
PAID ENOUGH ATTENTION IN OUR
COMMUNITY, IN OUR STATE TO THE
SERIOUSNESS OF THIS DRIVING
WHILE BLACK SITUATION OR HOW I
MENTIONED IN ONE OF THE
EDITORIALS WALKING WHILE BLACK,
AS THIS SITUATION MIGHT HAVE
BEEN.
THESE ARE SERIOUS SITUATIONS
THAT HAVE BUILT UP OVER A
GENERATION OR SO, AND THAT'S WHY
THAT ANGER IS EXPLODING SO MUCH
ON THE STREETS OF FERGUSON AND
DELWOOD AND ALL THE OTHER
MUNICIPALITIES AROUND THERE NOW.
>> Woodruff: RYAN
SCHALLENBERGER IS A FORMER
MAYOR.
HOW DO YOU SEE THAT?
>> WELL, THERE IS -- BRIAN
FLETCHER IS A FORMER MAYOR.
HOW DO YOU SEE THAT?
>> LAST STATISTICS SHOWED ABOUT
83% OR 84% OF THE POLLS BEING
AFRICAN-AMERICAN BY OUR POLICE
OFFICERS.
BUT LET ME EXPLAIN WHY THE
MISCONCEPTION.
THE SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES
FERGUSON ARE OVER 9 PO%
AFRICAN-AMERICAN.
IF YOU HAVE TEN INDIVIDUALS
PULLED OVER BY A FERGUSON POLICE
OFFICER, CHANCES ARE IT'S GOING
TO BE IN THE LOW TO MID
80 PERCENT JUST BY THE PURE FACT
OF NUMBERS.
THE OTHER THING THAT SKEWS THAT
IS MANY AFRICAN-AMERICANS HAVE
LOW WAGES, THEY MAY NOT HAVE
TAGS, INSURANCE.
WHEN AN OFFICER DOESN'T SEE A
TAG OR PLATE, HE'LL PULL THEM
OVER.
DOESN'T MATTER TO HAVE THE CLR
OF THE INDIVIDUAL.
I'M NOT SAYING THERE IS NOT
RACIAL PROFILING, I'M JUST
GIVING YOU THE REASON WHY I
BELIEVE THE NUMBERS ARE AS FAR
AS OUR CITY IS CONCERNED.
>> Woodruff: I THE HEAR YOU BOT.
TONY MESSNEGER, HOW MUCH
DIFFERENCE DO YOU THINK IT WILL
MAKE HAVING THE MISSOURI STATE
PATROL IN THERE PROVIDING LAW
ENFORCEMENT GOING FORWARD AND
HOW MUCH CONFIDENCE DO YOU HAVE
THAT THE INVESTIGATION WILL BE
CARRIED OUT IN A FAIR ANDTRANSPT
HAPPENED?
>> FIRST OF ALL, I THINK THE
GOVERNOR WAS TOO SLOW TO ACT AND
MADE THE WRONG DECISION.
THERE WAS ALREADY STATE PATROL
THERE.
I THINK HE WOULD HAVE BEEN
BETTER OFF TAKING CITY OF
ST. LOUIS POLICE OFFICERS WHO
HAVE BETTER TRAINING IN THIS
SORT OF SPECIFIC URBAN SITUATION
AND PUT THEM IN CHARGE.
I UNDERSTAND THERE WERE SOME
DISCUSSIONS ABOUT THAT.
THE GOVERNOR CHOSE TO GO A
DIFFERENT WAY.
I HOPE IT IS BENEFICIAL.
I HOPE IT IS HELPFUL.
BUT FOR IT TO BE HELPFUL, THE
MILITARIZATION SITUATION IS
GOING TO HAVE TO BE DIALED DOWN.
THE TEAR GAS AND RUBBER BULLETS
AND THE DOGS, THAT STUFF'S GOING
TO HAVE TO GO AWAY, AND I'D LIKE
TO THINK THAT'S GOING TO WORK.
SEEMS TO ME THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
IS NOW ENGAGED ALL THE WAY UP TO
THE WHITE HOUSE AND, SO, IN AN
IDEAL SITUATION, THINGS WILL
CALM DOWN A LITTLE BIT.
I THINK IT WILL TAKE A COUPLE OF
NIGHTS FOR THAT TO HAPPEN.
IF THE SAME POLICE OFFICERS ARE
OUT THERE BUT UNDER A DIFFERENT
LEADERSHIP, I'M NOT SURE HOW
MUCH OF A DIFFERENCE THAT'S
GOING TO MAKE.
I'D LIKE TO THINK THAT THINGS
WILL BE CALMER TONIGHT.
I'D LIKE TO THINK THAT IT WILL
SLOW DOWN.
AS TO THE SECOND SITUATION, WHAT
HAPPENS IN T
WILL HAVE A DIRECT EFFECT ON HOW
INTENSE THE PROTESTS ARE FROM --
GOING FORWARD.
I THINK THAT THE PROSECUTOR, THE
F.B.I., WHOMEVER IS ULTIMATELY
IN CHARGE OF THIS INVESTIGATION,
IS GOING TO HAVE TO BE
TRANSPARENT AND BE TRANSPARENT
SOON.
RIGHT NOW, WE JUST DON'T HAVE
ENOUGH INFORMATION AND, SO, THE
PEOPLE IN THE COMMUNITY,
PRIMARILY AFRICAN-AMERICAN
PEOPLE, DO NOT TRUST THE STATE
OF THE INVESTIGATION RIGHT NOW.
>> Woodruff: AND FORMER MAYOR
FLETCHER, VERY QUICKLY, DO YOU
HAVE CONFIDENCE IN THIS
INVESTIGATION?
>> I DO.
I BELIEVE ULTIMATELY THAT A
THOROUGH INVESTIGATION WILL BE
DONE.
JUDY, I WANT TO INDICATE THIS IS
NOT INDICATIVE OF THE FERGUSON
COMMUNITY.
THAT IS PROVEN.
BUT THE ARRESTS SO FAR THAT HAVE
BEEN DOING THE LOOTING ARE NOT
FROM FERGUSON, THEY'RE FROM
SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES, ONE AS
FAR AS DALLAS, TEXAS.
IF YOU ASK THEM WHAT STREET IN
FERGUSON THEY LIVE ON, YOU'RE
INTERVIEWING A LOT OF RESIDENTS,
AND THIS IS NOT INDICATIVE OF A
WONDERFUL COMMUNITY THAT'S BEEN
HERE FOR YEARS AND WE'RE MEETING
TONIGHT AS COMMUNITY LEADERS TO
OVERCOME THE NEGATIVE PUBLICITY
WE'RE GETTING AND I BELIEVE
UNJUSTLY SO.
I DON'T BELIEVE IN THE HISTORY
OF FERGUSON WE'VE EVER HAD AN
AFRICAN-AMERICAN TEEN EVER SHOT
BY A POLICE OFFICER.
UNFORTUNATELY, IT'S A TRAGIC
SITUATION BUT IT'S MORE ABOUT
FERGUSON, IT'S ABOUT A NATIONAL
AND REGIONAL SITUATION THAT'S
WIDER AND, UNFORTUNATELY, I
THINK THAT THE MEMORY OF MICHAEL
BROWN IS BEING EXPLOITED BY MANY
PEOPLE WHO DON'T CARE ABOUT HIM
OR THE FAMILY, THEY CARE ABOUT
THEIR OWN PERSONAL CONCERNS AND
THAT'S THE SAD PART ABOUT THE
SITUATION.
WE HAVE A LOT OF HEALING TO DO
IN FERGUSON AND I AM GOING TO BE
A PART OF THAT AND I'M GOING TO
ASK OTHERS TO JOIN WITH US.
>> Woodruff: FORMER MAYOR
BRIAN FLETCHER AND TONY
MESSNEGER, EDITORIAL FOR
ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH.
>> Ifill: ONE OF THE MANY ISSUES
IN FERGUSON THAT'S ATTRACTING
NATIONAL ATTENTION IS THE EXTENT
TO WHICH LOCAL POLICE ARE
BECOMING EVER MORE HEAVILY ARMED
OR AS MANY PUT IT: MILITARIZED.
HARI SREENIVASAN IN OUR NEW YORK
STUDIOS PICKS UP THAT PART OF
THE STORY.
>> Reporter: MOST NOTABLY, MANY
HAVE BEEN TALKING ABOUT HOW
AKING ITS
WAY FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE TO POLICE DEPARTMENTS
AROUND THE COUNTRY.
MATT APUZZO HAS BEEN COVERING
THIS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES AND
JOINS ME NOW FROM ITS WASHINGTON
D.C. BUREAU.
MATT, WHAT KIND OF EQUIPMENT ARE
WE TALKING ABOUT?
>> FOR STARTERS, THE PENTAGON
MAKES IT VERY HARD TO TRACK
EQUIPMENT THAT GOES FROM THE
MILITARY TO LOCAL AGENCIES.
I MEAN, THE BEST DATA WE CAN GET
COMES AT THE COUNTY LEVEL.
BUT IN A RESPONSE LIKE THIS
WHERE -- YOU KNOW, WHERE IT'S
BASICALLY ALL HANDS ON DECK FOR
A COUNTY RESPONSE, YOU KNOW, A
NUMBER OF M-16s -- M-16s ARE
UNDER PRESIDENT OBAMA, THERE
HAVE BEEN TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
M-16s TRANSFERRED TO POLICE
DEPARTMENTS NATIONWIDE AFTER,
YOU KNOW, BEING USED IN THE
MILITARY.
WE'VE SEEN THERE HAVE BEEN SOME
TRUCKS, THERE HAVE BEEN SOME
AIRCRAFT.
THIS IS PART OF A PROGRAM THAT
BEGAN AS PART OF THE DRUG WAR,
THE IDEA BEING, IN THE '90s,
WE NEED TO GIVE THIS SURPLUS
MILITARY EQUIPMENT TO POLICE
DEPARTMENTS AS A WAY TO FIGHT
DRUG GANGS AND, LIKE A LOT OF
PROGRAMS, AFTER 9/11, IT WAS
SORT OF RE-ENGINEERED FOR
COUNTERTERRORISM PURPOSES AND
EXPANDED AND, YOU KNOW, YOU'VE
REALLY SEEN AFTER THE DRAWN-OUT
TWO WARS, YOU'VE SEEN A HUGE
AMOUNT OF MILITARY EQUIPMENT
TRANSFERRED FROM THE PENTAGON TO
STATE AND LOCAL POLICE
DEPARTMENTS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW WIDESPREAD
IS THIS AND WHAT HAPPENS TO THE
EQUIPMENT IF POLICE DEPARTMENTS
DON'T WANT IT?
>> IT'S VERY WIDESPREAD.
IT'S ONE OF THE MORE POPULAR
PROGRAMS AS FAR AS THE POLICE GO
BECAUSE IT'S FREE.
WE BOUGHT A BUNCH OF M-WRAPS,
MIND RESISTANT TRUCKS FOR
FIGHTING IN IRAQ.
NOW WE'RE NOT FIGHTING IN IRAQ
ANYMORE AND WE HAVE ALL THE
EXTRA TRUCKS BASICALLY OFFERED
TO POLICE DEPARTMENTS FOR FREE
AND THEY'RE SAYING IF YOU WANT
THE TRUCKS YOU CAN HAVE THEM AND
IF YOU DON'T WANT THEM STRAP
THEM.
>> Sreenivasan: SO THE POLICE
DEPARTMENTS YOU'VE TALKED TO IN
YOUR REPORTING, DO THEY SAY ANY
PARTICULAR REASON THAT THEY NEED
AN ARMORED VEHICLE THAT CAN
WITHSTAND A MINE PATROLLING
THEIR STREETS?
>> MOST POLICE DEPARTMENTS SAY,
LOOK, I DON'T THINK WE
NECESSARILY NEEDED TO SUSTAIN A
MINE EXPLOSION BUT WE WANTED A
BULLET-PROOF TRUCK AND THIS WAS
AVAILABLE FOR FREE OR GO OUT AND
BUY IT.
FOR THE PAST TEN YEARS, FEDERAL
GRANTS HAVE BEEN PAYING FOR
POLICE DEPARTMENTS TO BUY THIS
STUFF OUTRIGHT, SO THE IDEA THAT
THIS IS ALL JUST COMING FROM THE
PENTAGON, THAT'S JUST ONE PART
OF IT.
SO WHAT YOU'RE SEEING IS YOU'RE
SEEING POLICE DEPARTMENTS
SAYING, WELL, JEEZ, IF IT'S
FREE, WHAT'S THE DOWN SIDE?
>> ONE OF THEIR CONCERNS IS
THEIR CITIZENRY AND COMMUNITIES
IN CERTAIN AREAS ARE HEAVILY
ARMED.
IS THERE ANY LEGITIMACY TO THAT
CLAIM SAYING WE'RE ALMOST
OUTGUNNED WHEN WE GO OUT THERE
AND WE DON'T FEEL PROTECTED.
>> THERE'S AN ARGUMENT POLICE
SHOULD BE PROTECTED.
NOBODY I TALK TO SAY POLICE
SHOULDN'T HAVE PROTECTION, BUT
THE IDEA THAT THE STREETS OF THE
UNITED STATES ARE SO DANGEROUS
AS THE POLICE ARE OUTGUNNED
ISN'T BORNE OUT BY THE DATA.
WE'RE LOOKING AT VIOLENT CRIME
IN THE UNITED STATES NOW IS AT A
GENERATIONAL LOW AND POLICE
SHOOTINGS HAVE BEEN STEADILY
DECLINING -- SHOOTINGS AGAINST
POLICE.
I SHOULD NOTE THAT WHILE THE
AND PRIVATE
GROUPS KEEP DATA WHEN PEOPLE
SHOOT POLICE, NO SUCH DATA IS
COLLECTED WHEN THE POLICE SHOOTS
PEOPLE, AND WHAT'S INTERESTING
ABOUT THIS IS WHAT WE'RE SEEING
IN FERGUSON IS WE CAN HAVE THE
DISCUSSION ABOUT WHAT MILITARY
EQUIPMENT SHOULD GO TO POLICE
DEPARTMENTS, BUT YOU CAN BE
CERTAIN THAT WHAT'S HAPPENING IN
FERGUSON IS ONLY GOING TO
ENCOURAGE MORE POLICE
DEPARTMENTS TO BUY THIS STUFF.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT A
COUPLE OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS
TODAY, EVEN THE ATTORNEY
GENERICS SAY THEY'RE VERY
CONCERNED ABOUT THE
MILITARIZATION.
ANYTHING LIKELY TO HAPPEN?
IT SEEMS LIKE A CONGRESSIONAL
PROGRAM WITH SOME SUPPORT.
>> YEAH, I MEAN, THERE HASN'T
REALLY BEEN ANY OPPOSITION TO
THIS PROGRAM.
YOU KNOW, THE CRITICISM OF THE
SO-CALLED MILITARIZATION OF
POLICE HAS LARGELY COME FROM
LIBERTARIAN QUARTERS FOR SEVERAL
YEARS.
THEY HAVE KIND OF BEEN THE LONE
VOICE ON THIS.
INSTITUTES AND MAGAZINES HAVE
BEEN WRITING A LOT ABOUT THIS.
IN FERGUSON, YOU'RE STARTING TO
SEE WHAT'S HAPPENING THERE KIND
OF GALVANIZE SOME OF THE MORE
TRADITIONAL LIBERAL VOICES
AGAINST THIS IN WAYS THAT
THEY'VE KIND OF JUST BEEN ON THE
SIDELINES ON THIS ISSUE, BUT
YOU'RE RIGHT, THE IDEA THIS IS A
NEW CONCEPT TO MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS, CERTAINLY THIS IS NOT
TRUE.
IT'S BEEN NO SECRET THESE
TRANSFERS HAVE BEEN GOING.
THE MILITARY TRANSFER PROGRAM IS
VERY POPULAR AS ARE THE GRANT
PROGRAMS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MATT APUZZO FROM THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, D.C., THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: TODAY'S PLEAS FOR
RESTRAINT, SAFETY, PEACEFUL
PROTEST AND JUSTICE WENT WELL
BEYOND MISSOURI OF COURSE.
AFTERNOON, "THE EYES OF THE
WORLD ARE ON US."
WE EXPLORE HOW SOME OF THESE
ISSUES AND IMAGES ARE RESONATING
AROUND THE COUNTRY.
ERIC LIU IS ERIC LIU IS AN
AUTHOR, EDUCATOR, AND CIVIC
ENTREPRENEUR.
HE IS THE FOUNDER AND CEO OF
CITIZEN UNIVERSITY.
AND JELANI COBB IS AN ASSOCIATE
PROFESSOR OF HISTORY AND
DIRECTOR OF THE INSTITUTE FOR
AFRICAN AMERICAN STUDIES AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT.
HE IS ALSO A CONTRIBUTOR TO THE
NEW YORKER.
HE'S BEEN FILING FROM FERGUSON
AND JOINS US FROM ST. LOUIS.
>> Woodruff: JELANI COBB,
SOMETHING THE FORMER MAYOR OF
FERGUSON SAID A FEW MOMENTS AGO
IS THIS COULD HAPPEN ANYWHERE.
YOU HAVE BEEN ON THE STREETS OF
FERGUSON FOR THE LAST FEW DAYS.
DO YOU AGREE WITH THAT?
>> WELL, I THINK RECENT HISTORY
SHOWS THAT NOT ONLY COULD IT
HAPPEN ANYWHERE, IT HAS HAPPENED
IN SEVERAL OTHER PLACES.
THERE ARE SOME REALLY TERRIBLE
OVERLAPS HERE, ONE OF WHICH IS A
STRIKING IRONY THAT TRACY
MARTIN, THE FATHER OF TRAYVON
MARTIN, WHO WAS SLAIN TWO YEARS
AGO UNDER CIRCUMSTANCES I THINK
WE'RE ALL FAMILIAR WITH, HE WAS
SCHEDULED TO ACTUALLY BE IN THIS
AREA FOR AN EVENT THAT WILL TAKE
PLACE ON AUGUST 24th PROMOTING
NON-VIOLENCE CALLED PEACE FEST,
AND HE AGREED TO ATTEND THIS
PROGRAM A WEEK BEFORE MICHAEL
BROWN WAS KILLED.
HE'S NOW COMING HERE UNDER VERY
DIFFERENT CIRCUMSTANCES.
SO WE'VE SEEN ALL THESE THINGS
HAPPEN BEFORE.
THAT NOTWITHSTANDING, I THINK
IT'S VERY TROUBLING TO SAY IN
THE CONTEXT OF A COMMUNITY
THAT'S GRIEVING, THAT'S
DEVASTATED AND THAT CERTAINLY
FEELS A GREAT DEAL OF RESENTMENT
IN THE WAY IN WHICH IT'S BEING
POLICED, THAT THERE IS NOTHING
ATYPICAL ABOUT WHAT'S GOING ON
HERE, THAT THIS IS SOMETHING
THAT COULD HAVE JUST ALIGHTED
ANYWHERE BUT JUST HAPPENED HERE.
>> Woodruff: ERIC HOLDER, PICK
UP ON THAT.
WHY WOULD IT NOT BE ATYPICAL AND
DOES IT EXPLAIN THE DEPTH OF
SOME OF THE ANGER WE'RE SEEING?
>> I THINK ONE OF THE QUESTIONS
PROTESTERS HAVE BEEN CHANTING IN
FERGUSON IS SIMPLE -- WHAT IF IT
WAS YOUR TOWN?
I THINK PEOPLE ACROSS THE
COUNTRY WATCHING THINGS UNFOLD
ARE BEGINNING TO RECKON WITH THE
FACT THAT THIS IS NOT ONLY THE
PRODUCT OF THE EXTRAORDINARILY
SEGREGATED AND CHARGED
CIRCUMSTANCES THAT YOU MIGHT
FIND IN FERGUSON BUT THAT IN
EVERY TOWN IN THIS COUNTRY RIGHT
NOW THERE IS ALIENATION AND
EVERY TOWN IN THE COUNTRY THERE
ARE YOUNG PEOPLE WHO BECAUSE OF
THE COLOR OF THEIR SKIN ARE
RECEIVING BRUTAL MISTREATMENT BY
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND THERE ARE
COMMUNITIES ALL ACROSS THIS
COUNTRY RIGHT NOW WHERE PEOPLE
CROSSED LINES OF RACE AND CLASS
SIMPLY DO NOT SEE EACH OTHER.
THEY MAY PASS EACH OTHER BUT
THEY DON'T SEE EACH OTHER AND IN
THAT SENSE WE'RE ALL RECKONING
WITH THE POSSIBILITY OR THE
REALITY THAT IN EVERY TOWN IN
THE UNITED STATES RIGHT NOW, THE
POTENTIAL FOR THIS KIND OF
UNDERSTANDING AND TRAGEDY EXISTS
AND PART OF OUR RESPONSIBILITY,
I THINK, IS TO FIGURE OUT WHAT
WE CAN DO, WHATEVER TOWN WE LIVE
IN, SO ENSURE THAT WHAT'S
UNFOLDED IN FERGUSON DOESN'T
Woodruff: JELANI COBB,IVE.
SEEMS LIKE IN THE LAST 24 TO 48
HOURS, THIS HAS GONE FROM THE
QUESTION OF WHAT HAPPENED TO
MICHAEL BROWN TO SOMETHING ELSE,
IT HAS TOUCHED ANOTHER CORD, AND
I WONDER WHETHER IT SEEMS LIKE
THAT TO YOU AND WHETHER THE
ANGER SEEMS FOCUSED AROUND THAT
SINGULAR EVENT?
>> NO DOUBT THIS BECAME A VERY
DIFFERENT STORY EVEN IN THE 48
HOURS I HAVE BEEN HERE.
INITIALLY, THIS WAS VERY MUCH
FOCUSED ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES
AROUND THE DEATH OF MICHAEL
BROWN, BUT NOW IT'S EXPANDED
INTO, YOU KNOW, BIGGER QUESTIONS
ABOUT POLICING, QUESTIONS ABOUT
MILITARIZATION OF POLICE, AS YOU
TALKED ABOUT IN YOUR EARLIER
SEGMENT.
I HAD A CONVERSATION WITH
COMMUNITY ACTIVISTS AND PEOPLE
WHO LIVE IN THE AREA WHERE
MR. BROWN WAS KILLED AND THEY
TALK ABOUT ECONOMIC
DISENFRANCHISEMENT AND A WHOLE
ARRAY OF OTHER THINGS THAT TOUCH
UPON WHAT'S GOING ON IN THIS
COMMUNITY.
IF I CAN, I'LL SAY ONE THING IN
ADDITION TO THIS, ONE OF THE
THINGS I HEARD OVER AND OVER
AGAIN WHEN I TALKED TO PEOPLE
OUT IN THIS COMMUNITY AND I
SAID, YOU KNOW, WHAT EXACTLY DO
YOU WANT IN THE SHORT TERM?
WHAT DO YOU WANT IMMEDIATELY?
WHAT DO YOU THINK WOULD PACIFY
SOME OF THE ANGER THAT YOU SEE
HAPPENING IN THESE COMMUNITIES?
AND THEY SAID, WE WOULD LIKE FOR
THE OFFICER TO BE NAMED AND WE
WOULD LIKE FOR THERE TO BE
TRANSPARENCY IN THE PROCESS IN
WHICH HE IS BEING INVESTIGATED.
AND I HEARD THAT AGAIN AND
AGAIN.
SO I THINK WHAT THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT MAY NOT HAVE
RECOGNIZED OR MAYBE RECOGNIZED
TOO LATE WAS THE STEADFAST
INSISTENCE THAT THEY WOULD NOT
NAME THE OFFICER IS GOING TO
FUEL ANOTHER SET OF PROBLEMS,
BASED ON WHAT I'VE HEARD, EVEN
PEOPLE WHO ARE ACTIVISTS AND
POLICE OFFICERS HAVE ALL BEEN
TAKEN BY SURPRISE TO THE EXTENT
WHICH THERE HAS BEEN A DURABLE
ER NOT
SATISFIED WITH PROTESTING ONE
DAY BUT CAME OUT THE NEXT DAY
AND THE NEXT DAY AND THE NEXT
DAY AND PLEDGED TO DO SO FOR THE
AMOUNT OF TIME THE OFFICER
REMAINS ANONYMOUS.
>> Woodruff: LET'S TALK ABOUT
THE IDEA OF DURABLE ANGER, ERIC
HOLDER.
ONE OF THE THINGS MAKING ROUNDS
IN THE SOCIAL IMMEDIATEY IS
PICTURES OF PEOPLE PUTTING THEIR
HANDS UP IN THE AIR AND SAYING
DON'T SHOOT.
DOES THAT SPEAK TO PEOPLE BEYOND
WHO ARE IN THE STREET, THIS IDEA
THAT YOU CAN SAY THAT AND STILL
BE  VICTIM?
>> THE PICTURE WITH
AFRICAN-AMERICANS WITH HANDS UP
SAYING DON'T SHOOT, I LOOK AT
THAT PICTURE AND I AM STIRRED
BECAUSE I FEEL A DEEP SENSE OF
CONNECTION THAT IN THE UNITED
STATES IN 2014 THIS IS
HAPPENING, BUT I FEEL SHAMED AS
WELL THAT WE'RE NOT ABLE TO HAVE
A CONVERSATION ABOUT THIS ABOUT
THE CONDITIONS OF UNEQUAL
JUSTICE THAT UNFOLD WITHOUT IT
BEING QUICKLY POLARIZED AND
PARTISAN AND THE REALITY OF WHY
THIS HAS BECOME A NATIONAL STORY
AND PHENOMENON IS AS JELANI COBB
WAS SAYING, THE RESPONSE TO
POLICE IN FERGUSON TO THE
PROTESTERS, THE WAY THEY HAVE
RUN ROUGHSHOD OVER FREEDOM OF
SPEECH, FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY,
OVER THE RIGHT OF YOUNG PEOPLE
TO BE AFRICAN-AMERICAN AND OUT
IN PUBLIC HAS BEEN SHOCKING TO
THE CONSCIENCE AND RAISES A VERY
SIMPLE QUESTION OF WHAT COUNTRY
IS THIS?
THERE IS SOMETHING DEEPLY
STRIKING ABOUT HOW UN-AMERICAN
THE IMAGES SEEM AND I THINK ONE
OF THE CHALLENGES WE FACE RIGHT
NOW IS IT'S ONLY UN-AMERICAN IF
WE STAND UP AND DO SOMETHING AND
SAY SOMETHING ABOUT IT.
IF WE JUST TURN AWAY, AVERT OUR
GAZE AND SAY, WOW, THAT'Sr
SOMETHING AWFUL HAPPENING IN
THAT PART OF THE COUNTRY OR THAT
WEIRD COMMUNITY THEN, IN FACT,
NORMS SET IN WHERE WE TOLD RATE
THIS.
SO -- TOLERATE THIS.
I WANT TO TAKE A MOMENT WHERE
PEOPLE ARE SAYING HANDS UP DON'T
SHOOT, 50 YEARS AFTER THE CIVIL
RIGHTS ACT SIGNED INTO LAW.
49 YEARS AFTER THE VOTING RIGHTS
ACT, THE FACT THIS IS STILL
HAPPENING IS AN ABOMINATION AND
YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE AN AMERICAN
TO SAY THAT.
>> Woodruff: JELANI COBB,
WHERE DOES POLITICAL LEADERSHIP
COME INTO THIS, HAS IT BEEN
SUFFICIENT IT MATTER?
>> I THINK, YOU KNOW, AGAIN,
LIVING I DON'T LIVE IN THIS
COMMUNITY BUT BASED ON WHATEVER
HEARD FROM PEOPLE IN THE
INTERVIEWS I'VE TALKED TO A
COUPLE OF DOZEN PEOPLE AT THIS
POINT AND, YOU KNOW, THE THING I
HEARD FREQUENTLY THAT THEY
THOUGHT THE POLITICAL LEADERSHIP
WAS INEFFECTUAL, THAT PEOPLE HAD
COME TOO LITTLE, TOO LATE, THERE
WERE QUESTIONS ABOUT WHETHER OR
NOT THE GOVERNOR WOULD BE
INVOLVED, YESTERDAY, WHETHER OR
NOT THEY WOULD BRING THE
NATIONAL GUARD IN, A LOT OF
PEOPLE WERE WONDERING ABOUT HOW
THIS WOULD BE HANDLED.
IT ALSO SEEMED THAT ON THE
GROUND THERE WAS A KIND OF
AD HOC QUALITY SO, HO OUT THERE,
PEOPLE KIND OF SAW THE LINE OF
DEFENSE WHERE THERE WERE LOTS OF
OFFICERS BLOCKING THE AREA WHERE
THE QUICK TRIP STOOD.
BUT WHAT YOU COULDN'T SEE UNLESS
YOU WERE UP CLOSE IS THERE WERE
OFFICERS FROM DIFFERENT
MUNICIPALITIES, STATE PEOPLE,
LOCAL PEOPLE, AND SEEMED AS IF
THERE WAS A KIND OF OVERLAP.
YOU COULD KIND OF WONDER WHAT
THE CENTRAL COMMAND WAS, WHO WAS
CALLING THE SHOTS AND WHAT THE
REAL STRATEGY WAS.
THAT SAID, THERE WAS ANOTHER
THING TO BE ADDED, TWO QUICK
THINGS, ONE, THIS IS NOT SOLELY
BEEN BLACK.
BLACK AND WHITE PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
OUT THERE PROTESTING ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED AND IT WAS VERY
IMPORTANT FOR THEM TO CONVEY
THAT.
THE OTHER IS PEOPLE IN RIOT
GEAR, I DON'T THINK THAT'S WHAT
INCENSED PEOPLE.
THERE WERE MANY PEOPLE IN THE
COMMUNITY WHO DID NOT WANT TO
SEE MORE RIOTING, BUT THE IDEA
THAT THERE WERE POLICE OFFICERS
WHO WERE ON TOP OF ARMORED
VEHICLES WITH ASSAULT RIFLES
MOUNTED ON TRIPODS AND POINTED
TO THE CROWD DID NOTHING TO
CONVEY THAT THIS WAS A GROUP OF
PEOPLE WHO WERE INTERESTED IN
PRIER SERVING LAW AND ORDER, IT
SEEMED MUCH MORE LIKE A GROUP OF
PEOPLE THERE TO INTIMIDATE.
>> JELANI COBB AND ERIC HOLDER,
THANK YOU BOTH FOR YOUR
OBSERVATIONS.
>> Ifill: WE'LL BE BACK WITH
MARGARET WARNER FOR THE LATEST
ON IRAQ.
BUT FIRST, IT'S PLEDGE WEEK ON
PBS.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT.
AND THAT SUPPORT HELPS KEEP
PROGRAMS LIKE OURS ON THE AIR.
>> Ifill: FOR THOSE STATIONS NOT
TAKING A PLEDGE BREAK, WE NOW
TAKE A SECOND LOOK AT ONE MAN'S
EFFORT TO TURN PRISONERS LIVES
AROUND JUST AS HE DID HIS OWN.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Brown: YOU MAY SEE ME
WEARING A BLUE SUIT OR BLUE
PANTS AND A BLUE SHIRT NOW BUT
THE REALITY IS THAT MY JOURNEY
BEGINS INSIDE OF A JAIL CELL
JUST LIKE THIS 26 YEARS AGO.
>> Brown: MICHAEL SANTOS IS
BACK BEHIND BARS.
>> I FEEL A REAL KINSHIP WITH
EVERY GUY IN THIS ROOM.
>> Brown: BUT THIS TIME IT'S
HIS CHOICE.
SANTOS WAS JUST 23 WHEN HE WAS
CONVICTED OF TRAFFICKING COCAINE
IN 1987.
HIS OPERATION WAS BIG ENOUGH TO
DRAW A 45-YEAR SENTENCE, AND
WITH CREDIT GIVEN FOR GOOD
BEHAVIOR, HE SERVED 26 YEARS IN
FEDERAL PRISONS.
>> YOU CAN BECOME THE BEST IN
THE WORLD --
>> Brown: NOW HE'S TELLING
INMATES HIS PERSONAL STORY OF
TRANSFORMATION.
>> THE VISION I ALWAYS HAD, THAT
I WOULD BE ABLE TO COME BACK TO
SOCIETY, PUT ON A SUIT AND TIE
AND HAVE NOBODY KNOW THAT I EVER
SERVED A DAY IN PRISON, AND
THAT'S THE VISION THAT I WANT TO
INSTILL IN EVERY MAN IN THIS
ROOM.
>> Brown: SANTOS HAD SUPPORT
FROM HIS FAMILY, BUT HE ALSO HAD
AN INNER DRIVE THAT'S APPARENT
TO THIS DAY.
FROM THE MOMENT HE ARRIVED IN
PRISON, HE BEGAN PREPARING
HIMSELF FOR THE DAY HE WOULD BE
RELEASED, EVEN IF IT WAS DECADES
AWAY.
HE READ BOOKS ON PHILOSOPHY,
HISTORY AND LAW --
>> THAT'S GEORGE COLE FROM THE
UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT.
>> Brown: HE REACHED OUT TO
SCHOLARS OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE AT
STANFORD AND PRISON, SOME
IMPRESSED ENOUGH TO BECOME
MENTORS.
AND THIS IS GRADUATION DAY.
>> YES.
>> Brown: OVER THE YEARS,
SANTOS EARNED UNDERGRADUATE AND
MASTERS' DEGREES AND WROTE
SEVERAL BOOKS ABOUT THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM ALL FROM THE
INSIDE OF PRISON LAWS.
>> MY MAIN MESSAGE, YOU'VE GOT
TO BE ABLE TO SAY I MAKE A 100%
COMMITMENT TO REJECTING THE
CRIMINAL LIFESTYLE, I MAKE 100%
COMMITMENT TO PREPARING FOR
SUCCESS UPON RELEASE.
>> Brown: SIX MONTHS AFTER
RELEASE, SANTOS WAS IMPLORING
OTHERS TO FOLLOW HIS LEAD TO A
LIFE AFTER PRISON:  I WOULD
THINK IN ONE WAY THE LAST PLACE
YOU WOULD WANT TO GO IS BACK TO
PRISON, BEHIND THOSE DOORS.
>> I HAD OPPORTUNITIES TO
COMPLETELY WALK AWAY FROM MY
PAST AND TAKE A JOB TO SPONSOR
SUCCESSFUL BUSINESSES BUT I HAVE
A ROLE AND DUTY TO SHOW OTHERS
HOW TO PREPARE, HOW TO COME BACK
STRONG.
I HAVE A DUTY TO WORK OUT THE
FORMERLY INCARCERATED TRANSITION
INTO THE MARKET.
>> Brown: AND SS
LARGER MESSAGE TO THE REST OF
US, THAT CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
IS BROKEN.
>> I BELIEVE THIS IS THE BIGGEST
SOCIAL INJUSTICE OF OUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY.
>> Brown: THE KIND OF ENERGY
FROM A MAN MAKING UP LOST YEARS.
SANTOS IS WASTING NO TIME.
A SILICON VALLEY EXECUTIVE
IMBRICESSED HI SANTOS' WORK
INVITED HIM TO SPEAK AT A
CONFERENCE.
>> WE MAY CALL AT IT A SYSTEM OF
CORRECTIONS BUT IT'S A SYSTEM
THAT HOUSES HUMANITY.
>> Brown: HE BELIEVES IT'S
FULL OF REPEAT OFFENDERS BECAUSE
IS A RELIEF.EM TO LIFACT THAT S
>> Woodruff: AND FINALLY THE
BIG QUESTION, THE REST OF IRAQ,
I.S.I.L., THE ISLAMIC STATE,
THIS GROUP THREATENING BIG
CHUNKS OF THE COUNTRY, WHAT DOES
THE ADMINISTRATION THINK IT
NEEDS TO DO?
>> WELL, IT HOLDS A THIRD OF THE
COUNTRY, A HUGE CHUNK OF THE
COUNTRY, AND THE
ADMINISTRATION -- YOU KNOW, THE
PRESIDENT ESSENTIALLY PROMISED
IF THIS NEW GOVERNMENT COALESCES
AND EVERYONE BUYS IN, SUNNI,
SHIITE, KURDS, EVERYONE IS
WILLING TO SUPPORT AN IRAQI-LED
OPERATION ON THE GROUND.
THEY'RE LOOKING AT AIR STRIKERS
INCREASED INTELLIGENCE OPERATION
WHICH THEY'RE ALREADY DOING,
MORE TRAINING, MORE WEAPONS.
A KURDISH LEADER SAID TO ME
YESTERDAY, AH, BUT THE AIR
STRIKES CAN'T BE TOTALLY
EFFECTIVE UNLESS THE U.S. PUTS
SPECIAL OPS, INTELLIGENCE
PEOPLE, WHATEVER, ON THE GROUND
TO CALL IN THE AIR YAKS.
THE OFFICIAL I TALKED TO TODAY
SAID THAT'S CERTAINLY ON THE
TABLE BUT NO DECISION HAS BEEN
MADE YET BECAUSE THAT CAN BE
SEEN AS RUNNING AFOUL OF THE
PRESIDENT'S PROMISE NOT TO PUT
AMERICAN COMBAT BOOTS ON THE
GROUND.
>> YOU'RE DONE A LOT OF
REPORTING AND YOU'RE DOING A LOT
MORE.
YOU WILL BE ON THE GROUND.
GOING TO BE REPORTING THERE ALL
NEXT WEEK, MARGARET, AND WE LOOK
FORWARD TO THAT.
>> THANK YOU.
I HOPE I CAN SAY THE SAME.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE MISSOURI STATE HIGHWAY
PATROL TOOK OVER SECURITY IN
FERGUSON.
THAT'S AFTER LOCAL POLICE DREW
HEAVY CRITICISM FOR FORCIBLY
BREAKING UP PROTESTS OVER THE
KILLING OF A BLACK TEENAGER.
IRAQI PRIME MINISTER NOURI AL-
MALIKI ANNOUNCED HE'S STEPPING
DOWN AFTER ALL, AS HIS SUPPORT
CRUMBLED ON ALL SIDES.
AND BASEBALL OWNERS SELECTED
THEIR CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER,
ROB MANFRED, TO BE THE NEW
COMMISSIONER FOR MAJOR LEAGUE
BASEBALL.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE RIGHT NOW, FOR THOSE
SENDING KIDS OFF TO COLLEGE THIS
FALL, WHAT DO YOU KNOW ABOUT THE
PEOPLE GETTING PAID TO TEACH
THEM?
ON MAKING SENSE, A FORMER
ADJUNCT PROFESSOR INVITES
PARENTS TO CONSIDER THE LABOR
ECONOMICS AT WORK AT AMERICAN
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE'LL TRAVEL TO THSU.
AND EXPLORE THE HUMANITARIAN
CRISIS FACING INTERNALLY
DISPLACED REFUGEEES.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH DAVID
BROOKS AND RUTH MARCUS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.